oep(4059): add mayastor rwx block support with kubevirt (#4060)
openebs/openebs: designs/replicated-pv/mayastor/rwx-kubevirt.md

---
oep-number: OEP 3903

> title: Cordon Mayastor Pools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: RWX Block Volume Support
```

Author: sigh, also had forgotten to fix oep number... thanks!

### 🛠️ Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Following a top-down approach, here are the required modifications:

1. Extend Mayastor CSI to advertise `MultiNodeMultiWriter`, but only for block mode volumes.
   1. this means we'd reject it for fs volumes, since that cannot possibly work!
2. Core agent must now accept publishes, even if the volume is already published, but for a different node
3. Core agent must collate all valid initiator nqns when building the access control list for the NVMe-oF target.

<br>

Here's a depiction on how the connected nodes would look like:

```mermaid
graph LR;
    subgraph node-1
        kubelet-1
        csi-node-1
        nvme-of-initiator-1
    end
    subgraph node-2
        kubelet-2
        csi-node-2
        nvme-of-initiator-2
    end
    subgraph node-3
        io-engine-3
    end

    subgraph ControlPlane
        subgraph Agents
            Core
        end
        Rest
    end

    csi-controller

    kubelet-1 --> |CSI Api| csi-node-1
    kubelet-2 --> |CSI Api| csi-node-2
    csi-controller --> |Public Api| Rest
    csi-node-1 --> |Public Api| Rest

>     csi-node-2 --> |Public Api| Rest

Reviewer: Why does csi node need to interact with rest api? What information are we gathering here?

Author: Was only here to show we have a connection, but actually doesn't need to, only confusing things... removed it

  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
    - [Mitigations](#mitigations)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks \[optional\]](#drawbacks-optional)
- [Alternatives \[optional\]](#alternatives-optional)

<br>

## 🎯 Summary

This proposal introduces RWX (ReadWriteMany) block volume support in Mayastor to enable "shared" block storage for KubeVirt virtual machines. The enhancement aims to support VM migration across nodes, improving HA, maintenance, etc

<br>

## 📌 Motivation

Our users' KubeVirt VMs currently rely on PVCs with `ReadWriteOnce` access mode, limiting their ability to share block devices across nodes.
Kubevirt requires PVCs with `ReadWriteMany` access mode to enable its [live migration](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/compute/live_migration/).

<br>

### 🧱 Goals

- Implement RWX block volume support in Mayastor.
- Ensure compatibility with KubeVirt VM disk attachments.
- Provide CSI-compliant RWX semantics for block volumes.
- Support Persistent Reservations (optional) for fencing.

<br>

### 🚫 Non-Goals

- RWX support for filesystem volumes.

> - RWX support for non-KubeVirt workloads.

Reviewer 2: How are we going to know if the Block type pvc is going to be plugged into kubevirt pod (I guess its going to be used by virt-launcher)?

Author: We can only check for Block, not for the specific app, this has to be well documented

In addition, the `nvme` protocol itself does support reservations as a mechanism for:

- Controlling access to shared namespaces
- Preventing conflicts between hosts
- Ensuring data integrity and consistency

Considering this OEP is targeting KubeVirt specifically, then we may skip implementing access control through the reservations, on the premise that KubeVirt is already taking care of this by itself.

<br>

### 📚 User Stories

#### 🧑‍💻 Story 1

As a user, I want to live-migrate my KubeVirt VMs from one node to another. I accept that I must use block volumes in order to achieve this.

#### 🧑‍💻 Story 2

As a user, I need live-migration to be tolerant to volume-target failovers.

<br>

### 🛠️ Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Following a top-down approach, here are the required modifications:

1. Extend Mayastor CSI to advertise `MultiNodeMultiWriter`, but only for block mode volumes.
   1. this means we'd reject it for fs volumes, since that cannot possibly work!
2. Core agent must now accept publishes, even if the volume is already published, but for a different node

> 3. Core agent must collate all valid initiator nqns when building the access control list for the NVMe-oF target.

Reviewer 3: Are we going to limit and validate this to 2 initiators, because that's the only valid case of migration I think.

Author: hmm I guess we could do that, though what happens if the second node becomes `NotReady` during migration and then a third node is selected?

Reviewer 3: > hmm I guess we could do that, though what happens if the second node becomes `NotReady` during migration and then a third node is selected?

Does Kubevirt ensure this kind of continuity where migration is happening from say node1 to node2, and one of them goes `NotReady` during migration?

Author: @krishnaGajabi do you know?

Reviewer 4: KubeVirt supports three live migration strategies: pre-copy, post-copy, and auto-converge. The behavior during failures depends on which strategy is used.

Pre-copy is generally the safest approach. In this mode, all memory pages are first copied to the destination node, and only after the transfer is complete does the VM switch execution to the destination. This ensures that if the destination node fails mid-transfer, the VM keeps running on the source node without interruption.

Other strategies like post-copy and auto-converge have different trade-offs in terms of performance, downtime, and fault tolerance

For more details, see : https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/compute/live_migration/#understanding-different-migration-strategies

Author: At least using pre-copy it seems that migration can be cancelled; so this means we may have to support >2 publishes

  Core ->> IoEngine-1: Add Node-2 as allowed client
  IoEngine-1 -->> Core: 
  end
  Core -->>- PublicApi: 
  PublicApi -->> CSI Controller: 
  CSI Controller -->>- CO: 
```

<br>

#### Public OpenAPI

No changes required.

#### Internal gRPC

No changes required.

#### Kubectl Plugin

No changes required.

<br>

### Test Plan

Testing this features ofcourse requires exercising multi-attach scenarios where more than 1 workload is scheduled for the block volume, on different nodes.
We also need to ensure we reject multi-attach for filesystem volumes. \
The HA feature also needs to be tested, ensuring there's no flapping of the volume target, should multiple initiators attempt to trigger a failover.

<br>

#### Behaviour specification

<br>

### Risks and Mitigations

To ensure high-availability, when the connection from the initiator to the target becomes failed we trigger failover of the volume target to other nodes.
With multi-attach we now have multiple initiator-target connections, which may request for failover all at once, or in short sequence! This could wreak avoc in the system, leading into a self-feeding loop of failovers.

<br>

#### Mitigations

> In order to mitigate this, we must ensure the failover logic is hardened and resistive to short-succesion failovers, as well as prescriptive forcing the initiator to attempt reconnection against "new-existing" targets. By this I mean, if a previous failover creates a new target, then the next failover requests shoulds try to connect this "new-existing" target, rather than causing an even newewer target to be created, which would then break the first failover!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to mitigate this, we must ensure the failover logic is hardened and resistive to short-succesion failovers, as well as prescriptive forcing the initiator to attempt reconnection against "new-existing" targets. By this I mean, if a previous failover creates a new target, then the next failover requests should try to connect this "new-existing" target, rather than causing an even newer target to be created, which would then break the first failover!
```

Author: thanks, fixed
